GREAT EXPECTATIONS 
 

DRAMA 
 

in 
 
 

THREE ACTS AND PROLOGUE 
 
 
 

Royal Court Theatre. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

                                                                                     by W.S. Gilbert 
  -1871 



 

 



1 

 
 
 
 
 
 

PROLOGUE 
 
 

CHARACTERS: 
 

 
 
JOE GARGERY   A Blacksmith 
 
 
MAGWITCH   
     Two escaped Convicts 
DOLGE ORLICK 
 
 
PIP     A child of seven, Mrs. Gargery’s brother 
 
 
SERGEANT DEUCE 
 
 
MRS. JOS GARGERY 
 
 
SOLDIERS 
 
 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
 



2 

 
 
 
  SCENE. Exterior of Village Churchyard. 
 

Gravestones seen over low wall of 
Churchyard, Church in distance, Joe 
Gargery’s Forge The “Three Jolly 
Bargemen” Inn R.  Snow lies on the 
ground.  Sunset. 
 
Pip, a child of seven years, is discovered 
sitting on low wall  
of churchyard.  Magwitch, an escaped 
convict, is seen cautiously advancing among 
the tombstones.  He looks cautiously around 
him, then leaps over low wall, and gags 
Pip’s mouth.  Pip, who has not seen his 
coming, attempts to scream. 

 
 

Pip  Oh, don’t cut my throat, sir!  Pray don’t do it, sir! 
 
Mag.  Tell us your name!  Quick! 
 
Pip  Pip, Pip, sir! 
 
Mag.  Show us where you live, point out the place. 
 

(Pip points to the forge. Magwitch takes him 
up, shakes him, and a piece of bread falls 
out of Pip’s pocket.  Magwitch devours the 
bread ravenously.) 

 
Mag. You young dog, what fat cheeks you ha’ got! Darn me if I 

couldn’t eat ’em, and if I ha’nt half a mind to ’t!  Now lookee 
here, where’s your mother? 

 
Pip  (Pointing to a prominent tombstone.)  There, sir! 
 
Mag.  (starts)  Eh!  where? 
 
Pip There, sir (reading from tombstone)  “Also Georginia”.  That’s 

my mother. 
 
Mag. (looking at tombstone)  Oh, and is that your father, alonger your 

mother? 
 
Pip  Yes, sir, him too, late of the parish. 



3 

 
Mag. Ha!  Who d’ye live with, supposin’ you’re kindly let to live, 

which I ha’nt made up my mind about? 
 
Pip My sister, sir – Mrs. Joe Gargery – wife of Joe Gargery the 

blacksmith, sir. 
 
Mag. Blacksmith, eh!  (Looking at his leg on which is an iron ring.)   

Now lookee here (Bringing his face close to Pip’s.)  You know 
what a file is? 

 
Pip  Yes, sir. 
 
Mag.  And you know what wittles is? 
 
Pip  Yes, sir. 
 
Mag. (Shaking him.)  You get me a file and you get me wittles 

(shaking him again)  You bring ’em both to me, or I’ll have your 
heart and liver out! 

 
Pip (Very giddy.)  If you would kindly please to let me keep upright, 

sir, perhaps I shouldn’t be sick, and perhaps I could attend more. 
 
Mag. You go and bring that file and wittles directly and never you 

dare to tell a word about it, and you shall be let to live;  you fail, 
and your heart shall be torn out.  Now I ain’t alone, there’s a 
young man hid with me, in comparison with which young man I 
am a Hangel.  That young man hears the words I speak.  It is 
vain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that young man.  I 
am a-keeping that young man from harming of you at this 
moment with great difficulty.  I find it very hard to hold that 
young man off of your inside.  Now go. 

 
(Exit Pip, terrified, into the forge.)  

 
Mag. (shivering)  Ugh!  I wish I was a frog, or a eel!  (The report of a 

distant gun is heard.)  Ha!  was that firing!  I dunno.  Maybe not.  
When a man’s bolted from them hulks, and is alone  with a light 
head and a light stomach perishing of cold and want, he hears 
nothing all night but guns firing and voices calling.  Hears?  He 
sees the soldiers with their red coats lighted up by the torches 
carried afore, closing in around him.  Hears his number called, 
hears himself challenged, hears the orders, Present!  Cover him, 
steady men!  And is laid hands on – and their’s nothing!  Why if 
I see one pursuing party last night, I see a hundred;  and as to 
firing, why I see mist shake with the cannon arter it was broad 
day!  Ha, here’s the boy. 

 



4 

(Enter Pip with a bottle, and a small 
pastry.) 

 
Mag.  What’s in the bottle, boy?  (shivering) 
 
Pip  Brandy.  I think you’ve got the ague, sir. 
 
Mag. (Eating ravenously.)  I’m much of your opinion, boy; you’re not 

a deceiving imp, you’ve giv no one the office to follow you? 
 
Pip  No! 
 
Mag. Well, I believe you.  You’d be but a fierce young hound, indeed, 

if at your time of life you could help to hunt a wretched warmint, 
hunted as near death and dunghill as this poor wretched warmint 
is! 

 
      (Eats ravenously.) 
 
Pip  I’m glad you enjoy it, sir. 
 
Mag.  Did you speak? 
 
Pip  I said, I’m glad you enjoy it. 
 
Mag.  Thankee, my boy, I do. 
 
Pip  I’m afraid you won’t leave any of it for him. 
 
Mag.  Who’s him? 
 
Pip  The young man – that you spoke of. 
 
Mag. Oh, ah, him?  Yes, yes, he don’t want no wittles.  Who’s this a 

coming?  I’m off.  Give us hold of the file, boy, boy! 
 

(Takes file and hurries off among the 
tombstones.) 
 
(Enter Mrs. Joe Gargery.  She goes up to 
Pip and shakes him violently.) 

 
Mrs. Joe And wher’ the deuce have you been all the afternoon? 
 
Pip  Please, I’ve been down town to hear the Carols. 
 
Mrs. Joe Oh, well, you might ha’ done worse.  Perhaps if I warn’t a 

blacksmith’s wife and (what’s the same thing) a slave with her 
apron never off, I should have to hear the Carols.  I’m rather 



5 

partial to Carols myself, and that’s the best of reasons for my 
never hearing any. 

 
(She is about to take Pip into the forge, 
when a file of soldiers led by a sergeant 
enters R.) 

 
Serg. Halt!  Front!  Excuse me, Madam, I am on a chase in the name 

of the King, and I want the blacksmith. 
 

(Enter Joe Gargery from the forge.) 
 
Joe  And what might you want with him? 
 
Serg. Speaking for myself, I should say the honour and pleasure of his 

fine wife’s acquaintenance.  Speaking of the King, I answer, a 
little job done.  You see, blacksmith, we have had an accident 
with these, and I find the lock of one of ’em goes wrong 
(producing a pair of handcuffs) and the coupling don’t act 
prettly;  as they are wanted for immediate service, will you 
throw your eye over ’em? 

 
Joe  All right.  Convicts? 
 

(Operates on handcuffs with a file and 
tweezers.) 

 
Serg.  Yes – two on ’em. 
 
Joe  Poor devils! 
 
Serg. Ah, you may say that;  devils, anyhow.  Well they’ll find 

themselves trapped in a circle, I expect, sooner than they count 
on.  Now, black-smith, if you’re ready, his Majesty the King is. 

 
(Magwitch is seen in the Churchyard 
struggling and fighting desperately with 
Orlick, another escaped convict.) 

 
Mag.  I’ve got him!  I took him!  Hold him, Sergeant! 
 
Serg.  My men! 
 

(The soldiers spring over the low wall and 
bring the two convicts down, still fighting 
furiously with one another.) 

 
Serg. Surrender, you two, and confound yo’r wild beasts. Come 

asunder! 



6 

 
(The soldiers separate them.  Magwitch is 
furious.  Orlick is in extreme terror.) 

 
Mag.  Mind, I took him.  I give him up to you, mind that! 
 
Serg. It’s not much to be particular about.  It’ll do  you small good, my 

man, being in the same plight yourself. 
 
Mag. I don’t want it to do me any good – I don’t want it to do me 

more good than it does now.  I took him – he knows it – that’s 
enough for me! 

 
Orlick  Take notice guard, he tried to murder me. 
 
Mag. Tried to murder him?  Try and not do it?  I told him and giv’ him 

up – that’s what I done.  Murder him?  Worth my while, too, to 
murder him when I could do worse and bring him back. 

 
Orlick He tried to murder me.  I should have been a dead man if you 

hadn’t come up. 
 
Mag. He lies!  He’s a liar born and he’ll die a liar.  Look at his face 

ain’t it written there?  Do you see those groveling wandering 
eyes?  That’s how he looked when we were tried together!  He 
never looked at me. 

 
Orlick  (sneering)  You are not much to look at. 
 

(Mag. makes a desperate attempt to get at 
Orlick but is kept back by the soldiers.  
Orlick shrinks in abject fear.) 

 
Serg.  Enough of this parley.  Light those torches! 
 

(Soldiers light torches at the forge.) 
 
Mag. I wish to say something respecting this escape.  It’ll prevent 

some persons laying under suspicion along er me.  I took some 
wittles from the black-smith. 

 
Serg.  Hallo!    (Looking at Joe.) 
 
Joe  Hallo!    (Looking at Pip.) 
 
Mag.  It was some broken wittle, and a dram of liquor and a pie. 
 
Joe My missus did miss some things, just afore you come in.  (To 

Sergeant.) 



7 

 
Mag. (to Joe)  So you’re the blacksmith, are you?  Then I’m sorry to 

say I eat your pie! 
 
Joe God knows you’re welcome to it, - so far as it ever was mine.  

Ye don’t know what you’ve done but we wouldn’t have you 
starved to death for it,  poor miserable fellow creature.  Would 
us, Pip? 

 
Serg.  Fall in! 

(The two convicts are placed among the 
soldiers.) 

  Good day, blacksmith.  Quick march! 
 

(Sergeant and soldiers march off.) 
 
 
 

(CURTAIN) 
 
 
 

END OF PROLOGUE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



8 

 
 
 
 
 

CHARACTERS IN DRAMA. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 JOE GARGERY 
 
 
 PIP 
 
 
 DOLGE ORLICK 
 
 
 MR. JAGGERS 
 
 
 ESTELLA 
 
 
 MRS. JOE GARGERY 
 
 
 BIDDY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



9 

 
 

 
A  C  T    1st. 

 
 

JOE GARGERY’S FORGE. 
 

Ten years have elapsed since the Prologue. 
 
Pip discovered writing. Dolge Orlick (Joe 
Gargery’s journeyman) at work at forge. 

 
Orlick  (Sings as he hammers.) 

1
  Come hammer boys sound  
     Old Clem! 
  With a thump and a sound 
     Old Clem! 
  Beat it out, beat it out 
     Old Clem! 
  With a clink for the stout 
     Old Clem! 
  Blow the fire, blow the fire 
     Old Clem! 

2
  Roaring higher, roaring higher  
     Old Clem! 
 

Now then, you (to Pip)  That ain’t workin’, you know – that’s 
writing, that is – come – be a man – work like me, ’prentice Pip, 
look at old Orlick. (hammers) 

 
Pip Mind your own business, and let me mind mine.  This letter 

must be sent up town this morning. 
 
Orlick Some and their up towning!  ’Prentice writes letters, and 

journeyman works.  Yah!  All right - Yah!  (hammers) 
 

(Enter Joe from Street.) 
 
Joe Hallo!  What’s wrong now, old Orlick?  Pip,  dear boy, what’s 

wrong? 
 
Pip Oh, not much.  Old Orlick’s mad because I’m writing, and he’s 

hammering, that’s all.  I’m writing to Miss Havisham, as I 
always do on my birthday. 

 

                                               
1 Probably a typist’s mistake. Dickens writes “..hammer boys round…” 
2 Dickens: “Roaring dryer, soaring higher” 



10 

Orlick  Some, and their birthdays!  Yah!  (hammers) 
 
Joe Now look here, Dolge Orlick, I’m a master here, and I say who 

works, and who writes.  Here you, take yourself off down town 
to Mr. Pumblechook’s.  There’s a lock to pick – go and pick it. 

 
 (Orlick sulkily throws down hammer and 
taking up basket of tools, saunters out.  Joe 
takes up Pip’s letter.) 

 
  I say, Pip, old chap, what a scholar you are! ain’t you? 
 
Pip  I should like to be 
 
Joe Why, here’s a “J” and a “O” equal to anythink!  Here’s a “J” and 

a “O”, Pip, and a J, O, Joe! 
 
Pip  Ah! but read the rest, Joe. 
 
Joe The rest, eh, Pip?  One two, three.  Why, here’s three J’s, and 

three O’s, and three J O, Joes in it,  Pip. 
 
Pip  How do you spell Gargery, Joe? 
 
Joe  I don’t spell it at all. 
 
Pip  But supposing you did? 
 
Joe It can’t be supposed.  Th’ I’m uncommon fond of readin’, too.  

Give me a good book, or a good newspaper, and sit me down 
afore a good fire, and I ask no better.  Lord!  when you do come 
to a “J” and a “O”, and says you, “Here at last a J.O. “Joe”,  how 
interestin’ reading is! 

 
Pip  Why didn’t you every go to school, Joe? 
 
Joe Well, Pip I’ll tell you.  My father, Pip, he were given to drink – 

he hammered away at my mother most unmerciful.  It were 
almost the only hammering he did, excepting at myself.  And he 
hammered at me with wigour only to be equaled by the wigour 
with which he didn’t hammer at his anvil.  Well, one day my 
mother, she says, “Joe”,  she says, “Now, please God, you shall 
have some schooling, child”.  She put me to school.  But me 
father were that good in his heart, that he  couldn’t abear to be 
without us.  So he’d come with a most tremenjous crowd, and 
make such a row at the doors of the house where we was, that 
they was obligated to give us up to him.  And then he took us 
home and hammered us.  Which you see,  Pip, were a drawback 
on my learning. 



11 

 
Pip  Certainly, Joe. 
 
Joe Though, mind you, Pip, rendering unto all their doo,  and 

maintaining equal justice between man and man,  my father were 
that good in his heart, don’t you see, and it were my intentions to 
have put upon his tombstone that “Whatsomever the failings on 
his part, Remember, reader, he were that good in his heart”. 

 
Pip  Did you make that verse yourself, Joe? 
 
Joe I made it my own self.  I made it in a moment.  It was like 

striking out an horse shoe complete in a single blow.  I never 
was so much surprised in my life.  Well,  my mother soon 
followed, poor soul, and being left here alone, I got acquainted 
with your sister.  Now, Pip, your sister is a fine figure of a 
woman. 

 
Pip  I’m glad you think so, Joe. 
 
Joe So am I.  I’m glad to think so, Pip.  A little redness, or a little 

matter of bone, here or there,  what does it signify to me. 
 
Pip  If it does not signify to you, to whom does it signify? 
 
Joe Certainly – that’s it.  You’re right, old chap.  When I got 

acquainted with your sister, it were the talk how she were 
bringing you up by hand.  As to you, if you could have been 
aware how small and flabby, and mean you was – dear me, 
you’d have formed the most contemptible opinion of yourself. 

 
Pip  Never mind me love. 
 
Joe But I did mind you, Pip.  When your sister was ready and willing 

to come to the forge, I said to her, “And bring the poor little 
child.  God bless the poor little child”, I said to your sister.  
There’s room for him at the forge.  Well, you see,  Pip, you 
come, and here we are.  However, here’s the Dutch clock a 
working of himself up to being equal to striking twelve of ’em, 
and she’s not come home yet.  Hallo, here she is.  No, it’s Biddy.  
Well, I’ll just step out and see that Uncle Pumblechook’s mare 
ain’t set a forefoot on a piece of ice and come down. 

 
(Exit Joe.  Enter Biddy,  alarmed.) 

 
Pip  Why, Biddy, you’re all out of breath – what’s wrong? 
 
Bid.  Oh, that man! 
 



12 

Pip  What man? 
 
Bid.  That Orlick!  I met him – he frightened me so. 
 
Pip  The scoundrel!  What did he do? 
 
Bid. I met him just now, and he said, “Hallo”, he said,  “Going 

Home?”  “Yes”, said I.  “Well then”, said he, “I’m jiggered if I 
don’t see you home”.  Well, I gathered myself up, and I ran. 

 
Pip  Why? 
 
Bid.   Oh, because I – I’m afraid he likes me. 
 
Pip  (angrily) Did he ever tell you he liked you? 
 
Bid. No, he never told me so, but – he dances at me whenever he 

catched my eye. 
 
Pip  The ruffian! 
 
Bid.  (demurely)  But it makes no difference to you, you know. 
 
Pip No, Biddy, it makes no difference to me.  But I should have a 

very poor opinion of you, if he danced at you with your own 
consent.  Why, the fellow is a liberated convict, taken into 
service by Joe out of mere charity – there isn’t a greater 
scoundrel in the county.  Such a man as that to dance at a clever 
girl like you! 

 
Bid.  Clever! 
 
Pip Yes.  See how I pour over my books, and yet you always keep 

up with me.  It isn’t a year since you came into Joe’s family, and 
see what you’ve  learnt.  How do your manage it? 

 
Bid.  I suppose I must catch it, like a cough. 
 
Pip  Biddy, I want to tell you a secret. 
 
Bid.  About Miss Estella? 
 
Pip  Nonsense, Biddy.  I want to be a Gentleman. 
 
Bid.  Oh, I wouldn’t , if I was you.  I don’t think it would answer. 
 
Pip. Biddy, don’t be absurd.  If I could have settled down and been 

fond of the forge, I know it would have been better for me.  I 
should have been good enough for you.  Shouldn’t I, Biddy? 



13 

 
Bid.  Yes.  I’m not over particular  (sighing) 
 
Pip It wouldn’t have mattered being coarse and common if no one 

had told me so. 
 
Bid.  Who said it? 
 
Pip Miss Estella, the beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s – and 

she’s more beautiful than anybody ever was, and I admire her 
dreadfully, and I want to be a gentleman, on her account.  Biddy, 
I wish you could put me right!  If I could only get myself to fall 
in love with you – you don’t mind my speaking so plainly? 

  
Bid.  Oh, dear, not at all – don’t mind me. 
 
Pip If I could only get myself to do that, it would be the best thing 

for me. 
 
Bid.  But you never will, you see, Pip.  Never, never,  never. 
 
Pip Well, I don’t know.  It’s about time for Wopsle to be starting 

down town.  Just run over with it to the Bargeman, and get him 
3

to take my letter to Sates  House. 
 

(Exit Biddy.  Enter Estella. Enter Joe.) 
 
Pip Miss Estella!  this is a surprise.  Here, Joe,  here’s Miss Estella 

come to see us.  Miss Estella - Miss Havisham’s niece, you 
know. 

 
Joe  Eh – oh – servant, Miss. 
 
Est. You are the husband of the sister of this lad?  You are the 

husband, I say, of the sister of this lad? 
 
Joe (to Pip)  Which I meanter to say, Pip – as I keep and married 

your sister, and I were at the time what you might call, if you 
was so disposed, a single man. 

 
Est. Well, I believe you reared him with the intention of taking him 

for your apprentice.  Is that so,  Mr. Gargery? 
 
Joe You know, Pip, as you and me were ever friends, and it were 

looked for’ard to between us as bein’ calc’lated to lead to larks.  
Not but what, Pip,  if you had every made objections to the 

                                               
3 “Satis” in Dickens 



14 

business – such as its being open to clack and sut – or such like – 
such objections would have been attended to. 

 
Est. Did the lad ever make any objection?  Does he like the trade?  

(contemptuously)  Does he like the soot and grime and filth of a 
forge?  Did he never bring himself to look upon it as a coarse 
and common trade? 

 
Pip  Oh, Miss Estella, don’t – not before him. 
 
Joe Which it is well known to yourself, Pip, that it were the wish of 

your own heart, and there weren’t no objections on your part, 
and Pip, it were the great wish of your heart. 

 
Est.  Of course you received no premium with the boy. 
 
Joe Pip, which I meanter say, that were not a question requiring a 

answer betwixt you and me, and which you know the answer to 
be full well, No.  You know it to be No, Pip, and wherefore 
should I say it. 

 
Est. Well, Miss Havisham, my aunt, wishes me to tell you that the 

lad, Pip, has earned a premium by making himself useful at odd 
times at Sates House. She wishes me to give it to you in her 
name.  There are five and twenty guineas in this bag.  Take it. 

 
Pip I can’t take it from you, Miss.  Not money from you.  For 

Heaven’s sake, not money from you. 
 
Est. I tell you that it is not from me.  It is from Miss Havisham.  The 

lad has been a good and useful lad, and this is his reward.  Of 
course,  as an honest man you will expect no other, and no more. 

 
Joe (taking it)  This is very liberal on your part,  Pip, and it is as such 

received and grateful welcome, this never looked for, far nor 
near, nor nowheres. 

 
Est. I should tell you that Mr. Jaggers, my Aunt’s Solicitor, wishes to 

speak to you, Mr. Gargery,  on some business of his own.  He 
will be with you in half an hour.  I mention this that you may be 
here to receive him.  Good day  (Going.) 

 
Pip. Miss Estella, one word.  Why are you so cold, and cruel and 

proud to me?  I know I’m coarse rough common lad, and you’re 
a young lady, but I don’t want to be coarse and common, - it’s 
not my fault that I’m only a blacksmith.  It cuts me deep enough 
when I think of it, - don’t probe the wound deeper, Miss Estella. 

 



15 

Est. Pip, my mad aunt compelled me as a child to associate daily 
with you.  It was not my fault that you were my playmate, that 
you were taught by her to treat me as your equal.  That is over 
now.  I am a woman – you are almost a man.  Our paths lie 
apart.  Good bye, you silly fanciful boy. 

 
(Exit Estella.  Pip watches her.) 

 
Joe (with the money)  Astonishing!  Astonishing!  Pip, I do assure 

you this is astonishing! 
 

(Enter Mrs. Joe Gargery.) 
 
Mrs. G. And may I ask, without being afraid of having my head snapped 

off, what has astonished you?  Not that it need take much to do 
that, goodness gracious knows. 

 
Joe  Miss Estella, from Satis House, has been here. 
 
Mrs. G. Oh, has she.  I wonder, after that, you condescend to associate 

with such poor society as us.  I am sure I do. 
 
Joe Miss Estella said that Miss Havisham made it very pertickler 

that we should give her – were it compliments or respects, Pip? 
 
Pip  Compliments. 
 
Joe Which that were my own belief – her compliments to Mrs. J. 

Gargery. 
 
Mrs. G. Much good they’ll do me. 
 
Joe And wishing that the state of Miss Havisham’s ’elth were sitch 

as would have – allowed her, were it, Pip? 
 
Pip  Of having the pleasure. 
 
Joe  Of ladies company. 
 
Mrs. G. Well, she might have had the politeness to send that message, at 

first, but it’s better late than never.  And what did she give young 
4

Rantipol  there?  (Looking at Pip.) 
 
Joe She give him nothing.  What she give she give to his friends.  

“Any by his friends” were her explanation “I mean into the 
hands of his sister Mrs. J. Gargery”.  Them was her words, “Mrs. 

                                               
4 “Rantipole” in Dickens 



16 

J. Gargery”.  She mayn’t have know’d whether it was Joe or 
Jorge. 

 
Mrs. G. And how much have you got? 
 
Joe  What would present company say to ten pound? 
 
Mrs. G. They’d say pretty well – not much, but pretty well. 
 
Joe  What would present company say to twenty pound? 
 
Mrs. G. Handsome would be the word. 
 
Joe Well, then, it’s more than twenty pounds.  And to make an end 

of it, it’s five and twenty pound, and what it all means is more 
than I can tell.  It’s astonishing!  astonishing!  It’s altogether 
circumwented me.  I never knowed how that there Miss 
Havisham come to take that fancy to Pip,  seven years ago,  poor 
mad thing. 

 
Mrs. G. Noodle!  Wasn’t she lonely and solitary in her ramshackle old 

house with none but her niece, Miss Estella, about her?  And 
wasn’t the child lonely too, without a playmate of her own age?  
And isn’t it barely possible that uncle Pumblechook  might have 
been a tenant of hers, and that he might  sometimes, we won’t 
say quarterly or half-yearly, for that would be requiring too 
much of you – but sometimes – go there to pay his rent? And 
couldn’t she then ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a boy to 
go and play there?  And couldn’t Uncle Pumblechook, being 
always considerate, and thoughtful for us (though you may not 
think it possible) then mention that boy that I had brought up by 
hand, and have for ever been a willin’ slave to?  And lor’ a 
mussy me, here I stand talking to that mooncalf while uncle 
Pumblechook’s outside, waiting for his dinner.  There’s a pork 
pie, and a bottle of brandy, which’ll set him up afore he 

  goes back again. 
 
      (Exit Mrs. Gargery.) 
 
Pip  Joe, don’t you think I ought to pay Miss Havisham a visit? 
 
Joe  Well, Pip – what for? 
 
Pip  What for, Joe?  What is any visit made for? 
 
Joe There is some visits perhaps, as for ever remains open to the 

question, Pip, but as regarding this visit – she might think you 
wanted something more. 

 



17 

Pip  Don’t you think I might say I did not, Joe? 
 
Joe You might, old chap.  And she might believe you.  Similarly, she 

might not, for Miss Havisham sent message by Miss Estella, as 
that were all. 

 
Pip  Yes, Joe, I know she did. 
 
Joe  All. 
 
Pip  Yes, Joe, I tell you I know she did. 
 
Joe Which I meanter say, Pip, it might be as her  meaning were 

“Make an end on it”.  As you was!  Me to the North and you to 
the South. 

 
Pip But I want to show her that I am grateful for what she has done.  

I think I ought to do that. 
 
Joe That’s true, Pip, and unless you was to turn her out a set of 

shoes, all four round, which I meanter say as even a set of shoes 
all round, might  not act acceptable as a present in a total 
wacancy of hoofs. 

 
Pip  But I don’t mean a present. 
 
Joe Or even if you was helped to knocking her up a new chain for 

the front door, or say a gross or two of sharp headed screws for 
general use, - or some light fancy article for general use, such as 
a toasting fork when she took her muffins, or a gridiron, when 
she took a sprat or such like. 

 
Pip  I tell you I don’t mean a present, Joe. 
 
Joe  No, Pip, and what I say to you is – you are right,  Pip. 
 
Pip What I wanted to say was, that as we are rather slack just now, if 

you would give me a half holiday,  I would go up town, and 
make a call on Miss Est. Havisham. 

 
Joe (gravely)  Which her name ain’t Estavisham, Pip,  unless she 

have been rechristened. 
(Enter Dolge Orlick.) 

  Well, Pip, take a half holiday and go. 
 

(Exit Pip.) 
 
Orlick Now, Master!  sure you’re not a going to favour only one of us!  

If young Pip has a half holiday,  do as much for old Orlick. 



18 

 
Joe  What’ll you do with it if you get it? 
 
Orlick  What’ll I do with it?  What’ll he do with it? 
 
Joe  As to Pip, he’s going up town. 
 
Orlick Well, then, as to Orlick, he’s a going up town.  Two can go up 

town.  Some, and their up towning!  Come, no favouring in this 
shop.  Be a man.  (Hammers furiously.) 

 
Joe  Are you all right now? 
 
Orlick  Ah!  I’m all right. 
 
Joe Then as in general you stick to your work, as well as most men, 

let it be a half holiday for all. 
 
      (Enter Mrs. Gargery.) 
 
Mrs. G. Like you, you fool;  You’re a rich man, upon my life to waste 

wages in that way;  I wish I was his master. 
 
Orlick  You’d be everybody’s master if you durst. 
 
Joe  Let her alone. 
 
Mrs. G. I’d be a match for all noodles and all rogues, and I couldn’t be a 

match for the noodles without being a match for your master, 
who’s the dunder headed king of the noodles.  And I couldn’t be 
a match for the rogues without being a match for you, who are 
the blackest looking rogue between this and France!  Now. 

 
Orlick  You’re a foul shrew, Mother Gargery. 
 
Joe  Let her alone, will you? 
 
Mrs. G. What did you say?  What did that fellow, Orlick,  say?  What did 

he call me with my husband standing by?  O!  O!  O!  What was 
the name he gave me before the base man who swore to defend 
me?  O!  hold me!  O! 

 
Orlick Ah!  I’d hold you, if you was my wife.  I’d hold you under the 

pump, and choke it out of you. 
 
Mrs. G. Oh, to hear him!  To hear the names he’s giving me!  In my own 

house!  Me a married woman, and my husband standing by!  O!  
O! 

 



19 

Joe Now look you here, Orlick!  Are you man enough to come on?  
Then I meanter say havin’ regard to events as has just transpired 
atwixt you and her, Come on! 

 
 (Joe pitches into Orlick, Mrs. Gargery 
screams.  Pip runs in.  Orlick is floored.) 

 
Orlick  (rising)  Mother Gargery and all of you.  I take it out of you for 

this!  Mind!  All on you.  Old Orlick bullied and beat, eh? 
 
Joe  Hold your tongue. 
 
Orlick  Ah!  I’ll hold your tongue, and some others shall 
  hold their tongues, ’tain’t only one wot can hold 
  his tongue. 
 
Pip  Say another word, and it’ll be my turn.  I owe you one. 
 
Orlick Oh, you owes me one?  Well, I owes you one, and I’ll pay you 

afore long. 
 
Pip  What have I done? 
 
Joe  Let him alone. 
 
Orlick What have you done?  You come between old Orlick and a 

young woman he likes – you give him a bad  name to her – you 
comes over her with your smooth face and palavering ways.  I 
knows you – and I’ll take it out of you.  You too – Joe Gargery.  
You too – Mother Gargery.  All on you!  Mind, all on you! 

 
(Exit Orlick.) 
     
 (Mrs. Gargery exits L.   Pip R.H.) 

 
Joe Which I meanter say, Pip, as there fellow has a eye as means 

mischief, which to be sure a black and blue swelling, such as is a 
gathering of itself around old Orlick’s eye at the present 
speaking, is not calc’lated for to set off a naturally unamiable 
expression, but making doo allowance for that as between man 
and man I do believe as there isn’t a crime in the Noogate 
Calendar as that there Dolge Orlick isn’t ekal to. 

 
(Enter Mr. Jaggers.) 

 
Jag. Oh, you believe that of Dolge Orlick, do you?  
 
Joe Yes, without having the honour of your acquaintance, I do 

believe it of Dolge Orlick. 



20 

 
Jag. I know you do.  I knew you would.  But now I’ll ask you a 

question.  Do you know, or do you not know, that the Law of 
England supposes every man to be innocent, until he is proved – 
proved – to be guilty? 

 
Joe  Which I meanter say, as a Englishman myself – 
 
Jag. Come, don’t evade the question.  Either you know it,  or you 

don’t know it.  Which is it to be? 
 
Joe  Certainly I know it. 
 
Jag. Certainly you know it.  Then why didn’t you say so at first?  

Now I ask you what do you say to the conscience of that man, 
who with that fact before his eyes, can lay his head upon his 
pillow, after having pronounced a fellow creature guilty of a 
crime not yet committed!  And you, bear in mind,  might be 
summoned as a juryman upon the trial of this same Orlick, and 
having thus deeply committed yourself,  might return to the 
bosom of your family and lay your head upon your pillow, after 
deliberately swearing that you would truly try and issue join 
between our Sovereign Lady the Queen and the Prisoner at the 
Bar, and would true verdict give according to the evidence, so 
help you God! 

 
Joe  Which I meanter say that – 
 
Jag. Stop.  From information I’ve received, I have reason to believe 

that you are the blacksmith. 
 
Joe  Which I am. 
 
Jag.  You have an apprentice, commonly known as Pip. Is he here? 
 

(Enter Pip.) 
 
Pip  I am here. 
 
Jag. Good.  My name is Jaggers and I am a lawyer in London.  I have 

unusual business to transact with you, and I commence by 
explaining that it is not of my originating.  If my advice had 
been asked I should not have been here.  Now, Joseph Gargery, I 
am the bearer of an offer to relieve you of this young, man your 
apprentice.  You would not object to cancel his indentures at his 
request and for his good – you would want nothing for so doing. 

 
Joe (amazed)  Lord forbid that I should want anything for not 

standing in Pip’s way. 



21 

 
Jag. Lord forbidding is pious, but not to the purpose.  The question is 

– would you want anything? 
 
Joe  (sternly)  The answer is No 
 
Jag. Very well.  Recollect the admission you have made and don’t try 

to go down from it presently. 
 
Joe  Who’s a going to try? 
 
Jag.  I don’t say anyone is.  Do you keep a dog? 
 
Joe  Yes, I do keep a dog. 
 
Jag. Bear in mind then that Brag is a good dog, but Holdfast is a 

better.  Now I return to this young fellow.  And the 
communication that I have to make is, that he has Great 
Expectations.  I am instructed to communicate to him that he 
will come into a handsome property.  Further, that it is the desire 
of the present possessor of that fortune that he be immediately 
removed from his present sphere of life, and be brought up as a 
gentleman.  In a word, as a young fellow of Great Expectations. 

 
Pip (aside)  Miss Havisham!  Oh, Miss Havisham, this is to make 

me fit for Estella. 
 
Jag. Now, Mr. Pip, you are to understand that the name of the person 

who is your liberal benefactor remains a profound secret, until 
that person chooses to reveal it.  Now you are distinctly to 
understand that you are most positively prohibited from making 
any enquiry on that head in all communications you may have 
with me.  If you have a suspicion within your own breast (and 
you look as if you had some such suspicion) keep that suspicion 
within your own breast.  If you have any objection, now is the 
time to mention it. 

 
Pip  (amazed)  No, no – I’ve no objection. 
 
Jag. I should think not!  Now, Mr. Pip, I have done with stipulations.  

We come next to mere details.  There is already lodged in my 
hands a sum of money, amply  sufficient for your suitable 
education and maintainance. Oh, I tell you at once, I am paid for 
my services, or I shouldn’t render them.  Now then, it is 
necessary that you start at once. 

 
Pip  At once! 
 
Jag.  At once.  You can do that? 



22 

 
Pip  I suppose I can. 
 
Jag. You are sure you can, ain’t you, - the coach starts in half an 

hour.  You must go alone, for I have to return to Miss Havisham.  
When you get to London,  you will want money to buy clothes.  
Shall I leave you twenty guineas?  There they are – you need 
take nothing with you – you can buy everything as soon as you 
arrive.  My clerk will show you where.  (Counts money and 
pushes it to Pip.)  Well, Joseph Gargery,  you look 
dumbfounded. 

 
Joe  I am! 
 
Jag. It was understood that you wanted nothing for yourself, 

remember. 
 
Joe It was understood, and it are understood, and it ever will be 

similar according. 
 
Jag. But what if it was in my instructions to make you a present as 

compensation? 
 
Joe  As compensation for what? 
 
Jag.  For the loss of his services. 
 
Joe. (Laying his hand on Pip’s shoulder.)  Pip is that hearty welcome 

to go free with his services to honour and fortune as no words 
can tell him.  But if you think as money can make compensation 
to me for the loss of the little child – what come to the forge – 
and ever the best of friends – (deeply affected) 

 
Pip Ever the best of friends, dear, good, faithful, tender Joe!  Ever 

the best of friends, and we will ever be so. 
 
Jag. Now, Joseph Gargery – I warn you, this is your last chance.  No 

half measures with me.  If you mean to take a present, speak out, 
and you shall have it. If on the contrary you mean to say – 

 
Joe (Turning round in a furious rage.)  Which I meanter say that if 

you come into my place bull baiting and badgering me, come 
out!  Which I mean to say as sech if you’re a man, come on, 
which I mean to say  that what I say, I meanter say and stand or 
fall by. 

 
(Threatening Jaggers who retreats.) 

 



23 

Jag. Well, Mr. Pip, the sooner you leave here – as you are to be a 
gentleman – the better.  You had better start to-day.  Report 
yourself at my chambers – here is the address.  When you arrive, 
my clerk Wemmick will see to your comforts, that’s all I have to 
say.  Good morning. 

 
(Exit Jaggers.) 

 
5

Joe (calling)  Biddy – Mrs. Jaggers  – come here! I’ve news – great 
news. 

(Enter Biddy and Mrs. Jaggers.) 
Biddy!  Pip’s a gentleman of fortune, and he’s a going away to-
day. 

 
Bid.  Pip going away!  and to-day!  Oh, Pip! 
 
Pip Yes, Biddy, I mustn’t say to whom I’m indebted for this 

wonderful good luck. 
 
Bid.  (aside)  Miss Havisham. 
 
Pip  Nor why my benefactress wishes me to be a gentleman. 
 
Bid.  Miss Estella (aside) 
 
Pip I am under a promise not even to guess at her name.  But you 

may be sure, dear Joe, and dear Biddy, that I shall never forget 
you. 

 
Joe No, no, Pip.  I’m sure of that.  Ay, ay, old chap.  Bless you, it 

were only necessary to get it well round in a man’s mind to be 
certain of it.  But it took a bit of time to get it well round – the 
change come so uncommon plump, didn’t it? 

 
(Horn heard.) 

 
Pip Well, good bye, Joe.  Good bye, Biddy.  Good bye,   sister.  

There’s a reare good fortune in store for me, but I’ll never forget 
you.  Good bye dear loving faithful old Joe. 

 
 
 

ACT DROP 

                                               
5 Typist’s error?  “Mrs. Jaggers” should, of course, read “Mrs. Joe Gargery” 



24 

 
 

A  C  T   2nd. 
 
 

Pip’s Chambers in the Temple 
 
Herbert Pocket discovered. Enter Mr. 
Jaggers. 

 
Jag.  Good morning, Herbert.  Pip in? 
 
Her.  No, Mr. Jaggers, but I expect him.  Take a seat. 
 
Jag.  I will.  Well, Herbert, anything turned up for you yet? 
 
Her. No, Mr. Jaggers, not yet.  But I’m still in the counting house, 

that’s something.  I’m looking about me, you know. 
 
Jag. Yes, yes, I know.  Well, you and Pip have been living together 

for a year in these chambers.  How do you like him? 
 
Her. Immensely – Im – mensely!  He’s a thorough good fellow. A 

good fellow with impetuosity and hesitation, boldness and 
indifference, action and dreaming curiously mixed in him.  We 
get on capitally – the old Inn has been quite another place since 
he joined me in these chambers at your recommendation.  When 
I’m a capitalist – 

 
Jag.  A what? 
 
Her. A capitalist.  I shall be some day, you know, when I’ve looked 

about me, you know – when I see my opening, and I take a big 
house – he will still live with me (Looks at watch.)  Half past 
eight.  I have a lot of office work to do, and I’ve brought it home 
with me.  I must see about it.  I often bring work home – they 
like it at the counting house.  There’s no place like a counting 
house, Mr. Jaggers for looking about you until you find your 
opening. 

 
(Exit Herbert.) 
     
 (Enter Pip.) 

 
Pip Oh, Mr. Jaggers, I’m glad to see you.  I’ve just been round to 

your office.  I want – 
 
Jag.   Some money? 
 



25 

Pip  Yes – to buy this furniture which I am now hiring. 
 
Jag.  Go it!  I told you you’d get on.  Well, how much do you want? 
 
Pip  Well, I don’t exactly know. 
 
Jag.  Come – how much?  Fifty pounds? 
 
Pip  Oh, not nearly so much. 
 
Jag.  Five pounds? 
 
Pip  Oh, more than that 
 
Jag. Oh, more than that, eh?  How much more?  Come, let’s get at it.  

Twice five, will that do?  Three times five, will that do?  Four 
times five, will that do? 

 
Pip  I think four times five will do handsomely. 
 
Jag. Four times five will do handsomely, will it? Now what do you 

make of four times five? 
 
Pip  What do I make of it? 
 
Jag.  Ah! How much? 
 
Pip  I suppose you make it £20. 
 
Jag. Never mind what I make it, my good friend.  I want to know 

what you make it. 
 
Pip  Twenty pounds, of course. 
 
Jag. Good.  Now, my young friend, I am going to have a word or two 

with you. 
 
Pip  If you please, sir. 
 
Jag.  What do you suppose you are living at the rate of? 
 
Pip  At the rate of, sir? 
 
Jag.  At – the – rate – of. 
 
Pip  I can hardly say, sir. 
 
Jag. I thought so.  Now I have asked you a question, my friend, have 

you anything to ask me? 



26 

 
Pip Of course it would be a great relief to me to ask you several 

questions, but I remember our prohibition, sir. 
 
Jag.  Ask one. 
 
Pip Is my benefactor to declare herself – to be made known to me to-

day? 
 
Jag.  No.  Ask another. 
 
Pip  Is that confidence to be imparted to me, soon? 
 
Jag.  Waive that, a moment, and ask another. 
 
Pip  (reluctantly)  Have I anything to receive, sir? 
 
Jag. Ah!  I thought we should come to it.  Now, Mr. Pip, attend if you 

please.  (Producing paper.) You have been drawing pretty freely 
here, but you are in debt of course. 

 
Pip  I’m afraid I must say “Yes”, sir. 
 
Jag.  You know you must say “Yes”, don’t you? 
 
Pip  Yes, sir. 
 
Jag. I don’t ask you what you owe, because you don’t know, and if 

you did know you wouldn’t tell me; you would say less.  (Pip 
attempts to protest.)  Yes, yes, my  friend, it’s likely enough 
you think you wouldn’t, but you would.  Now take this piece of 
paper in your hand.  (producing note)  You have got it?  Very 
good.  Now unfold it, and tell me what it is. 

 
Pip  This is a bank note for £500.  
 
Jag. That is a bank note for £500, and a very handsome sum of 

money, too, I think.  You consider it so? 
 
Pip  How could I do otherwise? 
 
Jag.  Ah! but answer the question. 
 
Pip  Undoubtedly. 
 
Jag. You consider it undoubtedly a handsome sum of money.  Now 

that handsome sum of money, Pip, is your own.  It is a present to 
you in earnest of your “Great Expectations”.  At the rate of that 
handsome sum of money and at no higher rate you are to live 



27 

until the donor of the whole appears.  As I have told you before, 
I am the mere agent.  I execute my instructions and I am paid for 
doing so.  I think them injudicious, but I am not paid for giving 
my opinion on their merits. 

 
Pip There was a question just now, Mr. Jaggers, which you desired 

me to waive for a moment.  Is it likely that my patron will  
soon– 

 
Jag.  Will soon what? 
 
Pip  Will soon come to London – or summon me into the country – 
 
Jag.  What did I tell you, when we first met? 
 
Pip  That it might be years before that person appeared. 
 
Jag. Just so – that’s my answer.  When that person discloses, my part 

in this business will cease and determine.  When that person 
discloses, it will not be necessary for me to know anything about 
it.  And that is all I’ve got to say.  Good evening, Pip. 

 
      (Exit Jaggers.) 
 
Pip It’s impossible to get anything out of him.  I suppose he’s 

annoyed with Miss Havisham for not having taken him into her 
confidence, about her designing me for Estella – or perhaps she 

6
has done so, and he con’t approve of it.  When shall I see her 
again?  She will find me much changed.  Less coarse and 
common I  hope than when she saw me last.  Oh, Estella! 

 
      (Enter Biddy.) 
 
Pip  Why, Biddy!  My dear Biddy!  I’m so glad to see you. 
 
Bid. I’m come up to town with Joe, Pip.  He’ll be here directly, but 

he’s gone with Mr. Wopsle – he was our Parish Clerk, you know 
– sight seeing. 

 
Pip  But, you’re in mourning. 
 
Bid.  Yes, of course.  Poor Mrs. Joe, you know. 
 
Pip  Oh, of course.  I forgot. 
 
Bid.  Oh that indeed – if you forgot – 
 

                                               
6 Another typist’s error. Probably should read “won’t” or  “don’t” or “can’t”. 



28 

Pip But it’s nine months since she died, Biddy, and I did not expect 
to see you in mourning, not being a relation of my sister’s. 

 
Bid.  No, indeed – not being a relation of your sister’s. 
 
Pip Biddy, I think you might have written to me about these and 

matters. 
 
Bid.  Do you, Mr. Pip?  I should have written if I had thought that. 
 
Pip Don’t suppose that I mean to be unkind when I say I consider 

that you ought to have thought that. 
 
Bid.    Do you, Mr. Pip? 
 
Pip  I suppose you have left the forge now, Biddy? 
 
Bid. Oh, of course I have.  I have been speaking to Mrs. Hubble and 

together I hope we shall be able to take some care of Mr. 
Gargery. 

 
Pip  How are you going to live, Biddy?  If you want any  money – 
 
Bid. (quickly)  How am I going to live? I’ll tell you, Mr. Pip.  I am 

going to try and get the place of mistress of the new school. 
 
Pip I have not heard the particulars of my sister’s death, Biddy.  I 

only heard that she was struck on the head,  one night, by some 
unknown scoundrel and that she died of the blow. 

 
Bid. Well, for a long time she couldn’t speak, but one evening, just at 

tea time, she said quite plainly “Joe”.  So I ran and fetched Mr. 
Gargery from the forge.  She made signs that she wanted him to 
sit down close to her, and wanted me to put her arms round his 
neck.  So I put  them round his neck, and she laid her head 
down on his shoulder quite content, and satisfied.  And so she 
presently said “Joe” again, and once “Pardon”, and once “Pip”, 
and so she never lifted her head up any more, and it was just an 
hour later when we laid her down on her own bed, because we 
found she was gone.  (crying) 

 
Pip  Nothing was ever discovered, Biddy? 
 
Bid.  Nothing.  But everybody says it’s Orlick 
 
Pip  Orlick! 
 
Bid.  Yes, he disappeared immediately afterwards, and has never been 

seen since – but there is no other evidence. 



29 

 
Pip I’ll not wait for evidence.  I’ll not rest until I have brought him 

to bay.  I’ll spare neither time, trouble, nor money, to hunt him 
down.  From this moment my life is devoted to the discovery of 
that infernal ruffian!  My poor, poor sister, and Joe – how does 
he bear it? 

 
Bid.  Here he is, Mr. Pip, to answer for himself. 
 
      (Enter Joe.) 
 
Pip  Joe.  How are you, Joe? 
 
Joe  Pip.  How air you? 
 
Pip  I am glad to see you, Joe. 
 
Joe Which you have that growed, and that swelled, and that 

gentlefolked – as to be sure you are a honour to your Queen and 
country. 

 
Pip  And you, Joe, look wonderfully well. 
 
Joe Thank God, I’m ekewal to most.  And all friends is no baderder, 

if no for’arder.  ’Ceptin’ Wopsle, the Parish Clerk – he’s had a 
drop. 

 
Pip  Had a drop, Joe? 
 
Joe Why, yes.  He’s left the church and went into the play acting – 

which the play acting have likewise brought him to London 
along with me.  Which he appeared at a theatre last night. 

 
Pip  Were you at his performance, Joe? 
 
Joe  (With emphasis)  I were. 
 
Pip  Was there a great sensation? 
 
Joe Why, yes.  There certainly were a peck of orange peel.  

Partickler when he see the ghost – though I put it to you, sir, 
whether it were calc’lated to keep a man up to his work with a 
good heart, to be continually cuttin’ in twixt him and the ghost 
with “Amen”!  A man may have had a misfortune and been in 
the church, but that’s no reason why you should put hijm out at 
such a time.  Which I mean to say if the ghost of a man’s own 
father cannot be allowed to claim his attention, what can?  Still 
more so when his mourning hat is unfortunately made so small, 



30 

as that the weight of the black feathers bring it off, try to keep it 
on how you may. 

 
      (Enter Herbert.) 
 
Her.  Hallo! 
 
Pip  This is Mr. Gargery, Herbert. 
 
Joe Your servant, sir – which I hope as you and Pip gets your ’elths 

in this close spot.  For the present may be a very good inn 
according to London opinions, and I believe it’s character do 
stand it;  but I wouldn’t keep a pig in it myself – not in the case 
that I wished them to fatten wholesome, and to eat with a meller 
flavour on him. 

 
Her.  When did you come to town, Mr. Gargery? 
 
Joe Were it yesterday afternoon?  No, it were not.  Yes, it were – 

yes.  It were yesterday afternoon. 
 
Her.  Have you seen anything of London yet? 
 
Joe Why, yes, sir,  Me and Wopsle went off straight to look at the 

Blacking Ware’us.  But we didn’t find that it come up to it’s 
likeness in the red bills at the shop doors, - which I meanter say 
as it is there drawed too Architectooralooral. 

 
Her. That’s true enough.  Well, good bye, Mr. Gargery. I’m off again.  

Hard at work.  Can’t stop.  Fortune to make.  Goody bye, Miss 
Biddy. 

 
      (Exit Herbert.) 
 
Joe  Us three being now alone, sir – 
 
Pip  Joe!  how can you call me “Sir”? 
 
Joe Us three being alone, and me having the intentions and abilities 

to stay not many minutes more, I will now conclude – leastways 
begin – to mention what have led to my having had the present 
honour.  For was it not that my only wish were to be useful to 
you, I should not have had the honour of sitting down in the 
company and abode of gentlemen.  Well, sir, I were at the 
Bargeman t’other night, when a message was brought to me as 
Miss Havisham wished to speak to me. 

 
Pip  Miss Havisham, Joe? 
 



31 

Joe  She wished to speak to me. 
 
Pip  Yes, Joe, go on, please. 
 
Joe.  Next day, sir, having cleaned myself, I go and see Miss A. 
 
Pip  Miss A, Joe?  Miss Havisham? 
 
Joe Which I say, sir, Miss A, or otherwise Havisham.  Her 

expression air then as follering – “Mr. Gargery you are in 
correspondence with Pip”.  Having had one letter from you, I 
were able to say “I am”.  (When I married your sister, Pip, I said 
“I will” and when I answered your friend, Pip, I said “I am”.)  
Would you tell him then that which Estella was coming to 
London, and would do herself the pleasure of calling on you.  
Biddy, when I told her, says “I know he will be very glad to 
have it by word of mouth – it’s holiday time – we should like to 
see him – let’s go”.  I have now concluded, sir, and Pip.  I wish 
you ever well and ever prospering to a greater and greater height. 

 
Pip  But you are not going, Joe? 
 
Joe  Yes I am. 
 
Pip  But you are coming back? 
 
Joe No, I am not.  Pip, dear old chap – life is made up of ever so 

many partings welded together, as I may say. And one man’s a 
blacksmith, and one’s a whitesmith, and one’s a goldsmith, and 
one’s a coppersmith.  You and me is not two figures to be 
together in London, nor yet anywhere else, but what is private 
and beknown and understood among friends.  I’m wrong in these 
clothes I’m wrong out of the forge, or the kitchen, or the meshes.  
You won’t find half so much fault with me in my forge dress, 
with my hammer in my hand, or even my pipe.  Or if supposing 
as you should ever wish to see me, you come and put your head 
in at the forge window and see Joe the blacksmith there at the 
old anvil, in the old burnt apron, standing at the old work.  I’m 
awful dull, but I hope I’ve beat out something nigh the roots of 
this at last, and so God bless you, dear old Pip, old chap.  God 
bless you. 

 
(Exit Joe.) 

 
Pip  Stop – stop – dear Joe. 
 
Bid.  He won’t stop, sir.  Good bye, Mr. Pip. 
 



32 

Pip Why do you call me “Mr. Pip”?  It’s bad taste.  You used not to 
do so. 

 
Bid.  Used not.  O, Mr. Pip!  Used not! 
 
Pip  Biddy, one word before you go.  I have a favour to ask of you. 
 
Bid.  Yes? 
 
Pip  And it is that you will not omit any opportunity of 
  helping Joe on a little. 
 
Bid.  How helping him on? 
 
Pip Well, Joe is a dear good fellow – in fact, I think he’s the dearest 

fellow that ever lived, but he is backward in some things.  For 
instance, Biddy, in his learning  and manners. 

 
Bid.  Oh, his manners!  Won’t his manners do then? 
 
Pip  My dear Biddy, they do very well for the forge. 
 
Bid.  Oh – they do very well for the forge. 
 
Pip But if I were to remove him into a higher sphere – as I should 

like to do – they would hardly do him justice. 
 
Bid.  And you think he knows that? 
 
Pip  Biddy, what do you mean? 
 
Bid.  Have you never considered that he may be proud? 
 
Pip  Proud? 
 
Bid. He may be too proud to let any one take him out of a place, that 

he is competent to fill, and fills well and with respect.  To tell 
you the truth, I think he is. 

 
Pip Now, Biddy, I am very sorry to see this in you.  I did not expect 

this in you.  You are envious Biddy – grudging.  You are 
dissatisfied in consequence of my rise in fortune, and you can’t 
help showing it. 

 
Bid. If you have the heart to think so, say so.  Say so over and over 

again, if you have the heart to think so.  But whatever opinion 
you form of me shall make no difference in my remembrance of 
you.  Yet a gentleman should not be unjust neither. 

 



33 

(Exit Biddy.) 
 
Pip Joe!  Poor Joe!  How cruelly – how abominally I have treated 

him.  I will go to him tomorrow, and he shall see that I am not 
utterly dead to the calls of gratitude.  Tomorrow – yet stay!  
Estella will be here!  Estella!  That is something.  It is true that 
she is not coming of her own accord, but that she is coming at all 
is something!  What can be Miss Havisham’s motive in keeping 
her munificence to me such a secret.  Does Estella know its 
object?  Does she know that I am destined for her?  And I who 
know it,  dare not, dare not tell.  Come in! 

(Enter Estella.) 
7

  Estella!  I did not expect you to tell tomorrow! 
 
Est. I have come tonight at my aunt’s instructions.  I am here in 

London, on my way to Richmond.  I go there tomorrow, the 
distance is ten miles.  I am to have a carriage, and you are to take 
me.  This is my purse, and you are to pay my charges out of it.  
Oh, you must take the purse.  We have no choice – you and I – 
but to obey our instructions.  We are not free to follow our own 
devices – you and I. 

 
Pip  Where are you going to at Richmond, Estella? 
 
Est. I am going to live at a great expense with a lady there who has 

the power – or says she has – of taking me about,  and 
introducing me, and showing people to me, and showing me to 
people. 

 
Pip  I suppose you will be glad of variety and admiration? 
 
Est.  Yes, I suppose so.  I am to hunt after victims. 
 
Pip  Victims? 
 
Est.  Yes.  Those are my adopted aunt’s instructions. 
 
Pip  But why victims? 
 
Est. I will tell you.  It is to avenge her quarrel with the world.  Years 

ago, my mad aunt had a lover who behaved infamously to her.  
She passionately loved him.  The marriage was fixed, the 
wedding dresses were bought, the wedding tour was planned, the 
wedding guests were invited.  The day came, but not the 
bridegroom.  He never appeared again.  When she recovered 
from a dreadful illness that ensued, she laid the whole place 
waste, and she has never since looked upon the light of day.  Her 

                                               
7 Typist’s error? Should read “till”? 



34 

misfortune turned her brain, and she adopted me when I was but 
two years old,  with the deliberate intention that I should avenge 
her  quarrel with the world.  And accordingly I am going into 
society to hunt for victims. 

 
Pip  And you have no objection to urge against such a mission? 
 
Est. No.  Why should I?  What does it matter to me?  It is my 

destiny.  As well that as another. 
 
Pip  You speak of yourself, as if you were someone else. 
 
Est. Where did you learn how I speak of others?  Come, come,  you 

must not expect me to go to school to you.  I must talk in my 
own way.  How do you thrive with Mr. Pocket? 

 
Pip  Quite pleasantly – at least – 
 
Est.  At least? 
 
Pip  As pleasantly as I could anywhere away from you. 
 
Est. You silly boy – how can you talk such nonsense?  Will you 

never take warning?  Or do you kiss my hand in the same spirit 
in which I once, as a child, let you kiss my cheek? 

 
Pip  What spirit was that? 
 
Est.  A spirit of contempt for fawners and plotters. 
 
Pip  If I say yes, may I kiss the cheek again? 
 
Est. You should have asked that before you touched the hand.  But 

yes if you like.  Now I must go.  Don’t come down.  I have a 
reason for what I say – a hackney coach is below.  Mind, at 12 
tomorrow. 

 
(Exit Estella.) 

 
Pip At least let me show you a light, for the old stairs are crazy.  

(Holds light.)  What is that man?  Does he want me?  There is 
some one down stairs, is there not? 

 
Voice  Yes. 
 
Pip  What floor do you want? 
 
Voice  The top – Mr. Pip. 
 



35 

Pip  That’s my name.  There is nothing the matter. 
 
Voice  Nothing the matter? 
 

(Magwitch appears at the door.) 
 
Pip  Pray, what’s your business? 
 
Mag. My business!  Ah!  yes!  I will explain my business by your 

leave. 
 
Pip  Do you wish to come in? 
 
Mag.  Yes, I wish to come in, master  (Holds out his hands.) 
 
Pip  What do you mean? 
 
Mag. It’s disappointing to a man arter having looked for’ard so distant, 

and come so far, but you’re not to blame for that.  I’ll speak in 
half a minute.  Give me half a minute, please  (sits down)  There 
is no one nigh, is there? 

 
Pip Why do you, a stranger, coming into my rooms at this time of 

night ask that question? 
 
Mag. You’re a game one!  I’m glad you’ve growed up a game one.  

But don’t catch hold of me.  You’ll be sorry afterwards to have 
done it. 

(Pip recognizes him as he takes out a file.) 
You acted nobly, my boy.  Noble, Pip, and I have never 
forgotten it. 

 
Pip Stay – keep off.  If you are grateful to me for what I did when I 

was a child, I hope you have shown your gratitude by mending 
your way of life.  If you have come here to thank me, it was not 
necessary.  Still, however, you have found me out, there must be 
some good in the feeling that brought you here, and I will not 
repulse you.  But surely you must understand that I – 

 
Mag. You was a saying that I surely must understand.  What must I 

surely understand? 
 
Pip That I cannot wish to renew that chance intercourse with you of 

long ago under these different circumstances.  I am glad to 
believe that you have repented and recovered yourself.  I am 
glad that, thinking I deserve to be thanked, you have come to 
thank me.  But our ways are different ways.  You are wet and 
you look weary.  Will you drink something before you go? 

 



36 

Mag.  I think that I will drink, I thank you, afore I go. 
 
Pip I hope you will not think that I spoke harshly to you just now.  I 

had no intention of doing it.  I am sorry if I did.  I wish you well 
and happy.  How are you living? 

 
Mag. I’ve been a sheep farmer, a stock breeder, and other trades 

besides away in the new world – many a thousand mile of 
stormy water off this. 

 
Pip  I hope you have done well. 
 
Mag. I have done wonderful well.  There’s others went out away, as 

has done well too.  But no man has done nigh as well as me. 
 
Pip  I am glad to hear it. 
 
Mag. I hope to hear you say so, dear boy.  May I make so bold as to 

ask how you have done well since you and me was out on them 
lone shivering marshes? 

 
Pip  How? 
 
Mag.  Ah! 
 
Pip  I have been chosen to succeed to some property. 
 
Mag.  Might a mere warmint ask what property? 
 
Pip  I don’t know. 
 
Mag.  Might a mere warmint ask whose property? 
 
Pip  I don’t know. 
 
Mag. Could I make a guess, I wonder, as to your present income?  As 

to the first figure, now – five? Concerning a guardian, there 
ought to have been some guardian or such like, you being a 
minor – some lawyer maybe.  As to the first letter of that 
lawyer’s name now?  Would it be J, now?  Put it that the  first 
letter of that lawyer’s name would be J, and that his name might 
be Jaggers?  Yes, Pip, dear boy.  I’ve made a gentleman of you!  
It’s me wot has done it.  I swore that time, sure as ever I earned a 
guinea, that guinea should go to you.  What odds, dear boy?  Do 
I tell it for you to feel a obligation?  Not a bit.  I tell it for you to 
know as that there hunted dunghill dog, wot you kep life in, got 
his head so high that he could make a gentleman.  And, Pip, 
you’re him!  Lookee,  here, Pip, I’m your second father – you’re 
my son – more to me nor any son.  I’ve put away money only for 



37 

you to  spend.  When I was a hired out shepherd in a solitary hut, 
not seeing no faces but the faces of sheep, till I half forgot wot 
men’s and women’s faces was like – I see your’n.  I drops my 
knife many a time in that hut, when I was a eating my dinner or 
my supper, and I says, “Here’s the boy again, a looking at me 
while I eats and drinks”.  Lord forgive me, says I each time, and 
I goes out into the open air to say in under the open heavens – 
but wot, if I gets a liberty and money, I’ll make that boy a 
gentleman.  And I done it!  Why, look at you, my boy!  Look at 
these here lodgings of your’n, fit for a lord!  A lord?  Ah!  You 
shall show money with lords for wagers, and beat ‘em.  Don’t 
you mind talking, Pip.  You can’t do better nor keep quiet, dear 
boy.  You ain’t looked slowly for’ard to this for years and years,  
as I have.  You worn’t prepared for this as I was.  But didn’t you 
ever think it might be me? 

 
Pip  No, no, no – never – never. 
 
Mag. Well, you see, it was me, and single handed.  Never a soul in it 

but my own self and Mr. Jaggers. 
 
Pip  Was there no one else? 
 
Mag. (surprised)  Who should there be?  And, dear boy, how good 

looking you’ve growed.  There’s bright eyes somewheres, eh?  
Isn’t there bright eyes somewheres wot you love the thoughts 
on? 

 
Pip  (aside)  Oh, Estella!  Estella! 
 
Mag. They shall be your’n, dear boy – if money can buy ’em.  It 

warn’t easy, Pip, for me to leave them parts, nor yet it warn’t 
safe.  But I held to it, and the harder it was,  the stronger I held.  
At last I done it!  Dear boy, I done it!  But here I’m soaked 
through – let me turn into your room and change.  I’ll not be 
long, dear boy – I’ll not be long. 

 
(Exit Magwitch.) 

 
Pip Then Miss Havisham’s intentions towards me, are after all a 

mere dream!  Then Estella is not designed for me!  And it is for 
that convict, guilty of I know not what crimes, liable to be taken 
out of these rooms and hanged at the old Bailey door, that I have 
deserted Joe. 

 
      (Enter Herbert.) 
 
Her.  Why, Pip, what’s wrong?  You’re as pale as death. 
 



38 

Pip Herbert, my dear boy, something very strange has happened.  
My benefactor is not Miss Havisham, but the convict to whom I 
gave food fourteen years ago on the marshes.  He has made his 
fortune and has returned to England and declared himself.  He – 
he is in that room!  What is to be done? 

 
Her.  My poor, dear Pip.  I’m too stunned to think. 
 

(Enter Magwitch.) 
 
Mag.  Here I am, dear boy.  Ha! 
 

(Sees Herbert, draws knife as if to resist.) 
 
Pip  Quiet!  It’s an intimate friend of mine. 
 
Mag. It’s all right dear boy.  (Giving Herbert a little book.) Take it in 

your right hand!  Lord never forgive you if ever you split in any 
way sumever.  Kiss it.  (Herbert, amazed, kisses.)  Now you’re 
on your oath, you know! Now Pip and Pip’s comrade, wot’s to 
be done? 

 
Pip I do not even know what to call you.  I had best give out that you 

are my uncle. 
 
Mag.  That’s it, dear boy – call me uncle. 
 
Her.  You assumed some name, I suppose, on board ship? 
 
Mag.  Yes, Pip’s comrade.  I took the name of Provis. 
 
Pip  What is your real name? 
 
Mag.  Magwitch – Chrisen’d Abel 
 
Pip  What were you brought up to be? 
 
Mag. A warmint, dear boy.  And this is the gentleman wot this 

warmint made!  The real genuine one!  There – catch hold (gives 
pocket book.)  There’s something worth spending in that book,, 
dear boy.  It’s your’n.  All I’ve got ain’t mine, it’s your’n.  Don’t 
you be afraid on it.  There’s more where that come from.  I’ve 
come to the old country for to see my gentleman spend his 
money like a gentleman. That’ll be my pleasure, - and darn you 
all, from the judge in his wig to the colonist a stirring up the 
dust, I’ll show a better gentleman that the whole kit on you put 
together. 

 



39 

Pip Stop!  I want to speak to you.  I want to know what is to be done.  
I want to know what projects you have? 

 
Mag. Lookee here, Pip, first of all, lookee here.  I forgot myself half 

an hour ago.  Wot I said was low – look over it, Pip. 
 
Pip  Is there no chance person who might recognise you? 
 
Mag. Well, there ain’t a many – still there’s one, and his name’s 

Orlick. 
 
Pip  Dolge Orlick! 
 
Mag.  Wot – you knows him? 
 
Pip  He was Joe Gargery’s journeyman. 
 
Mag.  Wot’s come of him? 
 
Pip I don’t know.  He left Gargery’s forge immediately after the 

murder of my sister a year ago – he’s suspected of it. 
 
Mag. Indeed!  That’ll keep him quiet.  Pip, dear boy, it’s all a long of 

that infernal (I ain’t a going to be low) as I was took and tried 18 
years ago.  We was pals.   In the dock he turned King’s 
evidence again me, and so he got four years and I got fourteen.  
It was him as escaped from the hulks on the same night as I did.  
He give out as he escaped through fear of my taking his life on 
that hulk.  So he got off without further punishment, and I got a 
lifer. 

 
Pip  And how long do you remain? 
 
Mag.  How long?  I’m not going back.  I’ve come for good. 
 
Pip  Where are you to live?  What is to be done for you? 
 
Mag. Dear boy, there are disguises and wigs to be bought for money.  

And as to the where and of living, dear boy,  give me your own 
opinions on it. 

 
Pip  I think we had better take you abroad. 
 
Mag. Ay, but how, dear boy?  I might be seed going aboard ship – 

there’s detectives and such like to watch outward bound ships. 
 
Her. Stay.  I have a boat of my own at the Temple Stairs.  We are 

both good watermen, Pip, and could take him down  the river in 



40 

the night time, and hail a steamer going to some foreign port.  In 
the meantime, you must stop here. 

 
Mag. That’s it, dear boy, and Pip’s comrade.  We’ll go to foreign 

parts, and Pip, and Pip’s comrade shall show money with the 
best of foreign gentlemen.  But caution is necessary. 

 
Pip  How caution? 
 
Mag. Because I was sent for life, and there’s been over much coming 

back lately.  If I’m took, by the Lord, it’s death. 
 
 

END OF ACT 2nd. 
 



41 

 
 

A  C  T      3rd. 
 
 

MR JAGGERS’ OFFICE 
 

 
(Enter Pip and Clerk.) 

 
 
Clerk Mr. Jaggers is busy for a moment, sir, but I’ll tell him you are 

here. 
 

(Exit Clerk.) 
 
Pip Now to learn the worst.  If Miss Havisham had nothing to do 

with my altered circumstances – if there was no communication 
between her and that wretched man, I shall know it now!  Ah!  
Mr. Jaggers! 

 
(Enter Jaggers.) 

 
Jag.  Now, Pip, be careful. 
 
Pip (aside)  He knows of Magwitch’s return.  (aloud)  I will be 

careful. 
 
Jag. Don’t commit yourself, and don’ commit any one – you 

understand – any one.  Don’t tell me anything.  I don’t want to 
know anything.  I’m not curious. 

 
Pip I merely want, Mr. Jaggers, to assure myself that what I have 

been told is true.  I have no hopes of its being untrue, but at least 
I may verify it. 

 
Jag. Yes.  But did you say “told”, or “informed”?  “Told” would 

seem to imply verbal communication.  You can’t have verbal 
communication with a man in New South Wales you know. 

 
Pip  I will say “informed” Mr. Jaggers. 
 
Jag.  Good. 
 
Pip I have been informed by a person named Abel Magwitch that he 

is the benefactor so long unknown to me. 
 
Jag.  That is the man – in New South Wales. 
 



42 

Pip  And only he? 
 
Jag.  And only he. 
 
Pip I am not so unreasonable, sir, as to think you at all responsible 

for my mistakes and wrong conclusions, but  I always supposed 
it was Miss Havisham. 

 
Jag.  As you say, Pip, I am not responsible for that. 
 
Pip  And yet it looked so like it, sir. 
 
Jag. Not a particle of evidence, Pip, - take nothing on its merits – take 

everything on evidence.  There’s no better rule. 
 
Pip I have no more to say, sir,  I have verified my information, and 

there’s an end. 
 
Jag. And Magwitch in New South Wales, having at last disclosed 

himself, you will comprehend, Pip, how rigidly throughout  my 
communication with you, I have always adhered to the strict line 
of fact.  There has never been the least departure from the strict 
line of fact.  You are quite aware of that? 

 
Pip  Quite, sir? 
 
Jag. I communicated to Magwitch – in New South Wales – when he 

first wrote to me – from New South Wales – the caution that he 
must never expect me to deviate from the strict line of fact.  I 
also communicated to him another caution.  He appeared to me 
to have obscurely hinted in his letter, at some distant idea of 
seeing you in England, here.  I cautioned him that I must hear no 
more of that, that he was not at all likely to obtain a pardon;  that 
he was expatriated for the term of his natural life, and that his 
presenting himself in this country would be an act of felony.  I 
gave Magwitch that caution;  I wrote it to New South Wales.  He 
guided himself by it, no doubt. 

 
Pip  No doubt. 
 
Jag. I have been informed by my clerk, Wemmick, that he has 

received a letter, under date of Portsmouth, from a colonist of 
the name of Purvis, or – 

 
Pip  Or Provis – 
 
Jag. Or Provis – thank you, Pip.  Perhaps it is Provis.  Perhaps you 

know it’s Provis? 
 



43 

Pip  Yes. 
 
Jag. You know it’s Provis.  A letter under date Portsmouth,  from a 

colonist of the name of Provis, asking for the particulars of your 
address, on behalf of Magwitch.  Wemmick sent him the 
particulars by return of post Probably it is through Provis that 
you have received the explanation of Magwitch – in New South 
Wales. 

 
Pip  It came through Provis. 
 
Jag. Good day, Pip – glad to have seen you.  In writing by post to 

Magwitch – in New South Wales – or in communicating with 
him through Provis – have the goodness to mention that the 
particulars and vouchers of our long account shall be sent to you, 
together with the balance.  Good day, Pip. 

 
(Exit Jaggers.) 

 
Pip My last hope is gone!  Oh, Estella!  Estella!  My love, my love, 

my love! 
 

(Enter Estella.) 
 
Est.  You called me, Pip.  I am here. 
 
Pip  Estella! 
 
Est.  Yes; you are agitated. 
 
Pip I have found out who my patron is.  It is not a fortunate 

discovery, and is not likely to enrich me in reputation, station, 
fortune, - anything.  There are reasons why I must say no more 
of that.  It is not my secret, but another’s. 

 
Est.  It is not your secret, but another’s – well? 
 
Pip When I was first taken to Miss Havisham’s – when I belonged to 

the dear old village, that I wish I had never left, I suppose I came 
as any other chance boy might have come, as a kind of servant, 
to gratify a whim, and be paid for it. 

 
Est.  Yes, Pip, you did. 
 
Pip  And that Mr. Jaggers – 
 
Est. Mr. Jaggers had nothing to do with it, and knew nothing of it.  

His being Miss Havisham’s lawyer, and his being the lawyer of 
your patron is a coincidence.  He holds the same relation 



44 

towards numbers of people, and it might easily arise.  Be that as 
it may, it did arise, and was  not brought about by anyone. 

 
Pip But when I fell into the meshes, I have so long remained in, she 

let me go on. 
 
Est.  Yes, she let you go on. 
 
Pip When I supposed – in a frenzy that seems unaccountable to me 

now – that she intended me to fall in love with you, and to marry 
you – she let me go on. 

 
Est.  Yes, she let you go on.  You were to have been my first victim. 
 
Pip  I was your victim, Estella. 
 
Est. No, Pip – dear Pip.  I was brought up to treat you so, that you 

could not help but believe that we were intended for one another, 
and to discard you when I had thoroughly mastered your heart.  
Dear Pip, I have struggled but in vain to carry out my adopted 
mother’s wishes.  I have assumed a coldness I did not feel – a 
pride that I was not actuated by.  I loved you, Pip – dear Pip, and 
I will ever love you. 

 
Pip You have always held your place in my heart, dear Estella, but 

when you know to whom I am indebted for my fortune, you – 
 
Est. I do know.  I have learnt all.  Mr. Jaggers has told me, all.  But 

from Miss Havisham I have learnt much more.  Miss 
Havisham’s lover was in fact a reckless  swindler, and this 
wretched man, Magwitch, was his humble accomplice.  When 
they were tried and sentenced, your benefactor’s child came 
under Miss Havisham’s notice, through Mr. Jaggers, and she 
adopted me.  Pip, I was that child. 

 
Pip  Then Magwitch – the convict – is – 
 
Est. My father!  Pip, our grief is terrible – but we will bear it 

together.  Pip, we will lighten each other’s load of sorrow, to the 
end of life. 

 
(Embraces.) 

 
(Enter Joe Gargery and Biddy.) 

 
Joe (aside)  Which I meanter say as not thinking that a lawyer’s 

office would be likely to be selected for mutual company 
keeping – did not knock as should have wished for to have done 
before walking in. 



45 

 
Pip  Joe – Biddy.  Why, Biddy!  How smart you are! 
 
Bid.  Yes, dear Pip. 
 
Pip  And, Joe, how smart you are! 
 
Joe  Yes, dear old chap 
 
Bid.  It’s my wedding days, and I’m married to Joe. 
 
Pip Dear Biddy, you have the best husband in the whole world,  and 

dear Joe, you have the best wife in the whole world,  and she 
will make you as happy as you deserve to be, you dear, good, 
noble Joe.  Dear Joe, I hope you will have children to love, and 
that some little fellow will sit in the chimney corner of a winter 
night, who may remind you of another little fellow – gone out of 
it for ever.  Don’t tell him, Joe, that I was thankless – don’t tell 
him, Biddy, that I was ungenerous and unjust. 

 
Joe I ain’t a going to tell him nothink o’ that nature, Pip.  Nor Biddy 

ain’t – nor yet no-one ain’t. 
 
Pip  Then you forgive me? 
 
Joe Oh, dear old Pip – old chap – God knows as I forgive you – if I 

have anything to forgive. 
 
Bid.  And God knows I do. 
 
Pip  You have heard who my patron was? 
 
Joe  I hear’d as it were not Miss Havisham, old chap. 
 
Pip  Did you hear who it was, Joe? 
 
Joe Well, I hear’d as it was a party wot didn’t steal a bottle of brandy 

and pork pie and a file from the old forge, fourteen years ago. 
 
Pip  So it was, Joe. 
 
Joe  Astonishing! 
 
Pip Well, Joe – I must get the convict abroad.  We have arranged to 

pull down the river tonight, until we are overtaken by the 
Rotterdam steamer, which we shall hail, and so we hope to get 
him out of the country without notice. 

 



46 

Joe Which it air like you, Pip, to be grateful to a troo friend, 
whatsomever his station in life, and though his misfortunes may 
ha’ been so to speak penal-servitoodenary in character.  But first 
let me give you this here note which I found at your Inn and 
which as it had “immediate” on it,  I brought along o’ me, 
knowin’ you was here. 

 
Pip A note (reads) “If you are not afraid to come to the marshes 

tonight or tomorrow at nine, and to come to the little sluice 
house by the lime kiln, on the river, come.  If you want 
information regarding your uncle Provis, you had much better 
come, and tell no one, and lose no time.  You must come alone”.  
That’s tonight.  But we have arranged to start from Temple 
Stairs at six o’clock.  How can I manage it?  I have it.  The 
Sluice House is at Codger’s Creek, close to river, fifteen miles 
above bridge.  The boat can pull down and wait at Codger’s 
Creek for me, and I’ll join them there after this mysterious 
business is concluded.  (aloud)  Joe, this note alters my plans.  
Tell Herbert that I cannot start with him, but will join him at 
Codger’s Creek at ten, and that the boat must wait for me 
alongside, if I am not there by that time. 

 
Joe  It shall be done, Pip. 
 
Pip Then, good bye, dear Joe.  Good bye, Biddy.  It may be many 

months before we meet again, but we shall meet.  It shall be for 
you to say, dear Joe, and dear Biddy, whether you will remain 
and work at the forge, or whether you will come and live with 
Estella and me.  Good bye and God bless you. 

 
(Exit Pip.) 

 
Joe Biddy, my dear, there’ll be a oar vacant in that boat, as far as 

Codger’s Creek, and here’s a arm wot is able to the emergency. 
 
Bid. But, Joe, this is our wedding day.  Instead of spending our week 

in London – suppose as you are going to help the poor convict 
away, we go all the way with him, and see him settled safe in 
foreign parts? 

 
Joe Well, Biddy, seeing as the old forge has been worked that reg’lar 

for a matter o’ five and thirty years, and may hap would like a 
rest, let it be a holiday,  and let it be spent as you say.  We’ll go 
alonger Magwitch, and when he’s settled, why, please God,  
we’ll come back alonger Pip!  And won’t never be parted no 
more. 

 
(Exeunt.) 

 



47 

 
 

SCENE 2nd. 
 

 
INTERIOR OF SLUICE HOUSE. 

 
A large tumble down picturesque building 
with dull red light.  It is almost dark. 
      
(Enter Pip.) 

 
Pip  Is any one here?  Is any one here? 
 

(Takes up candle, it is struck from his hand 
by Orlick, who comes on him from behind, 
and throws a noose over his head and 
draws his arms.) 
 

Orlick  Now I’ve got yer! 
 
Pip  What is this?  Who is it?  Help!  Help! 
 

(They struggle.  Orlick fastens him against 
wall.) 

 
Orlick Now I’ve got yer!  And now, call out again, and I’ll  make short 

work of you. 
 

(Orlick gropes about to find tinder box – he 
strikes a light slowly.  When tinder burns, 
Pip recognizes him.) 

 
Pip  Orlick! 
 
Orlick  Now I’ve got yer! 
 
Pip  Unbind me – let me go! 
 
Orlick Ah!  I’ll let you go – I’ll let you go to the moon – I’ll let you go 

to the stars.  All in good time. 
 
Pip  Why have you lured me here? 
 
Orlick  Don’t you know? 
 
Pip  Why have you set upon me in the dark? 
 



48 

Orlick Because I mean to do it myself.  Oh!  you enemy – you enemy!  
How dared you come between me and a young woman I liked. 

 
Pip  When did I? 
 
Orlick When didn’t  you?  It was you as always give old Orlick a bad 

name to her. 
 
Pip  You gave it yourself – you gained it for yourself. 
 
Orlick You’re a liar – and you always was a liar!  And you’ll take any 

pains, and stand any money to drive me out of the country, will 
you?  Now I’ll tell you it was never so worth your while to get 
me out of the country, as it is tonight.  Ah!  If it was all your 
money twenty times told to the last brass farden. 

 
Pip  What are you going to do with me? 
 
Orlick I’m a goind – I’m a going to have your life.  You was al-ways in 

old Orlick’s way, since ever you was a child.  You goes out of 
his way this present night – he’ll have no more on you.  You’re 
dead more than that I won’t have a rag on you.  I won’t have a 
bone of you left on earth.  I’ll put your body in the kiln.  I’d 
carry two such to it on my shoulders, and let people suppose 
what they may – they’ll never know nothing.  Now wolf, before 
I kill you like any other beast, which is what I mean to do, and 
wot I’ve bred up for you, I’ll have a good look at you, and a 
good goad at you.  Oh!  you enemy!  (Orlick drinks from tin 
bottle.)  Wolf – old Orlick’s a going to tell you some-thing.  It 
was you as did for your shrew sister. 

 
Pip  It was you, villain! 
 
Orlick I tell you it was you.  I tell you it was done through you. 

(Catching up a gun, and whirling the stock through the air.)  I 
come upon from behind, as I come upon you tonight.  I give it 
’er.  I left her for dead, but it warn’t old Orlick as did it – it were 
you.  You was favoured, he was bullied and beat.  Old Orlick 
bullied and beat, eh?  Now  you pays for it.  You done it.  Now 
you pays for it.  And I’ll tell you more.  Old Orlick’s been 
watching you for weeks.  He was a watching you the night afore 
last, for says old Orlick to himself, “Somehow or another I’ll 
have him”.  What!  when I looks for you!  I finds your uncle 
Provis,  eh?  You with a uncle too.  Why you know’d you at 
Gargery’s when you was so small a wolf that I could ha’ took 
your weazen betwixt this finger and thumb and chucked you 
away dead (as I’d thought a doing, odd times) when I saw you 
loitering among the Pollards on a Sunday, and you hadn’t no 
uncle then!  No – not you.  But I’ll tell you something more, 



49 

Wolf – and this ends it.  There’s them as is after your uncle, 
Provis, alias Magwitch – them as knows that he’s to start for 
foreign parts tonight – them as has got him hard and tight at least 
an hour ago.  Wolf – your uncle Magwitch is hard and fast on 
the road to the gallows an hour ago.  There!  there’s a end!  Wait 
a bit – when this here bottle’s empty, there’s a end. 

 
(Orlick drinks.) 

 
Pip  Help!  Help!  Help!  (Struggling to release himself.) 
 
Orlick Ah!  Yell on – Wolf!  There’s no one within three mile wot’ll 

hear you.  Yell on – it’s your last chance. 
 
Pip  Help!  Help!  Help! 
 
Orlick Now I’m a going to kill you.  You see this here hammer – well, 

I’m going to kill you with it. 
 

(He advances to Pip.  Pip shouts.  A 
desperate struggle ensues.  Orlick gets Pip 
down, and at that moment Joe Gargery, 
Herbert and Magwitch enter.  They drag 
Orlick away.) 

 
Mag. Orlick!  Stand off – he’s mine!  Look you here, this  man belongs 

to me.  Stand off! 
 

(Seizes Orlick – they struggle.  Orlick is 
killed.) 

 
Pip  Joe, how came you here? 
 
Joe Which I took your place, dear Pip – in the boat – and hearing of 

your crying Help, Help, and knowing your voice, we – 
 
Pip  Ran – 
 
Joe We did.  Similarly so likewise did Miss Estella and Mrs. Joe 

Gargery, but having all the heart but none of the wind ekewal to 
keepin’ up with us, have dropped behind – and,   Pip, dear old 
boy, old chap, here we are and just in time. 

 
(Enter Estella and Biddy.) 

 
Est.  (Runs to Pip.)  Pip, - dear Pip, then you are safe. 
 
Pip  Safe, dear Estella.  I owe my life to Provis. 
 



50 

Est. But he is in dreadful danger.  Four men have been following us 
in a boat all the way – and they landed here just after we came 
on shore. 

 
(Enter Sergeant and four Thames Police.) 

 
Police That man is a returned convict – that’s the man wrapped in a 

cloak.  His name is Abel Magwitch, otherwise Provis.  I 
apprehend that man and call upon him to surrender and you to 
assist. 

 
(Magwitch draws a pistol and is in the act 
of cocking it when Sergeant fires.  
Magwitch falls.) 

 
Mag. Lookee here, dear boy.  It’s best as a gentleman should not be 

knowed to belong to me now.  Only come to see me in prison as 
if you come by change alonger Jaggers.  Sit where I can see you 
when I am swore to for the last o’ many times, and I don’t ask 
no more. 

 
Serg.  I shot in self defence, sir – you saw that, he drew upon me. 
 
Mag. Sergeant, the pistol as I drew warn’t for you, it were for myself, 

but you didn’t know that, and you acted nateral and proper.  (to 
Pip)  I’m hit worse than I thought – but you’ll be more 
comfotable alonger me, when I’m under a dark cloud than when 
the sun shone – that’s best of all. 

 
Pip  Are you in much pain? 
 
Mag.  I don’t complain of none, dear boy. 
 
Pip Dear Magwitch.  I must tell you now, at last.  You understand 

what I say?  You had a child once, whom you loved and lost. 
 
Mag.  Yes, yes. 
 
Pip She lived, and found powerful friends – she is living now.  She 

is a lady, and very beautiful.  She is here, and she is to be my 
wife. 

 
(Magwitch makes a violent effort to 
embrace Estella.  He kisses her,  places her 
hand in Pip’s, and dies.) 



51 

 
Notes on the typescript: 
 
 
 
GREAT EXPECTATIONS WAS NEVER 
PRINTED.  THIS TYPESCRIPT WAS 
OBTAINED BY TOWNLEY SEARLE FROM 
THE LORD CHAMBERLAIN’S FILE 
COPY 
 
 
 
 
 
Pierpont Morgan Library Dept. of Music Manuscripts and Books. 
Gilbert and Sullivan Collection 
 
Record ID  62192 
Accession Number:   GSC 111361 
 
Gilbert, W.S. (William Schwenck), 1836-1911 
Great Expectations:  drama in three acts and prologue / by W. S. Gilbert 
 
Created: 1871 
 
Notes: 
“Royal Court Theatre” 
Statement of responsibility and date in pencil. 
Inserted slip:  “Great Expectations was never printed.  This typescript was 
obtained by Townley Searle from the Lord Chamberlain’s file copy” 
Typescript (carbon)